### Recommendations for popular proteomics software tools and search engines - What fits my custom pipeline:

## What kind of Scaffold files are recommended for a PX Submission?

Scaffold (from version 4.0) can export mzIdentML 1.1 files and we recommend uploading those files with the accompanying mgf peak list files that are referenced in them. This way an mzIdentML based Complete Submission can be done. 
For older Scaffold versions we recommend exporting the binary .sf3 result files as ProtXML files and use them for a Partial Submission as "search" files. 
What kind of ProteinPilot files are recommended for a PX Submission?

From version 5.0 ProteinPilot can export mzIdentML files, and currently a Complete Submission can accept both versions of mzid files. 

Generally a Partial Submission can be done and we strongly recommend providing human readable files besides the binary group file. Please export the group files into XML files using the following command line feature:

"Command Line Control and Open Results”

To support users and third-party software vendors that want to integrate ProteinPilot&trade Software, it is possible to script searches via command line and decrypt the .group file results into clear XML for full access to all the data it contains."

## What kind of Proteome Discoverer files are recommended for a PX Submission?

For a Partial Submission please export human readable pep.xml files out of the .msf files with Proteome Discoverer and upload the pepXML files and msf files as 'SEARCH' files for a Partial Submission, please see [www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/help/archive/faq#partial-PX](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/help/archive/faq#partial-PX).

In PD 2.2 the mzIdentML files are unfortunately not suitable for complete submission, yet. The PD team is working in solving this problem, but we are not aware of the current status. You would need to contact Thermo support to get more details.

If you are aiming for a Complete Submission please try to convert the binary .msf files into mzIdentML files with the ProCon tool (Bochum University) which is still under testing. Please see documentation and please note that ProCon only supports PD 1.x files.

## What kind of MaxQuant files are recommended for a PX Submission?

- MaxQuant files can be submitted to PRIDE either as a Partial or as a Complete submission.
- Mandatory files : RAW, SEARCH/RESULT, PEAK (only in the case of Complete Submission)
- For partial submission it is needed the SEARCH file (for complete submission is optional), this can be the combined/search folder generated in MaxQuant -this folder must be zipped before the submission. 
- In case of Complete Submission it is needed the mzTab files generated by MaxQuant.
- In addition, we encourage to upload -as OTHER – some of the files and tables generated in the combined/txt MaxQuant folder (upload file by file, instead the whole folder, since it is easier to be validated), such as:
        
        - Scan tables - MS Scan, Ms/MS Scan, MS3 scan
        - Identifications tables - protein groups, PTM sites, peptides, modifications, evidence, MS/MS
        - Features tables - All features, matched features
        - Metadata tables - summary, parameters, m/z range
        - Tables.pdf - contains the description of column entries in the tables
 
## How to upload DIA dataset to PRIDE:
 
Currently it is only possible to do a Partial Submission with DIA data.

In case that the dataset involves DIA and DDA data, we encourage submitters to submit them in different submissions.

The files required for the Partial Submission are the RAW data - instrument raw data files- and the SEARCH file (peptide results analysis).

In addition, it is convenient to upload any file that can add more information about the metadata, the DIA analysis or the downstream analysis. For example, it is possible to add PEAK files (for example, osw files from OpenSWATH output), and as OTHER files you can include SWATH assay libraries, file describing SWATH windows setup, iRT peptide SWATH assays file, Build Peptide Search Library (blib file) from Skyline.
